From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bavaro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
On this vote, the yays are 50, the
naysay are 50. The Senate being evenly
divided, the vice president votes in the
affirmative. The bill, as amended, is
passed. With a tie-breaking vote from
Vice President Vance, the US Senate has
adopted President Trump's giant domestic
policy bill, which now heads back to the
House of Representatives for a final
vote. The legislation is defined by the
staggering amount of debt that it's
creating, more than $3 trillion.
Today, I speak with my colleague Andy
Duran about how Republicans have
rewritten the rules to try to make all
of that debt vanish. And to Colobby
Smith about why despite that slight of
hand, the world is less and less
convinced that the United States can
handle its current debts.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Wednesday, July 2nd.
[Music]
Andy, welcome to the show. Thanks for
having me. So, President Trump's big,
beautiful bill, which is now in the
hands of the US House of
Representatives, does a lot of things.
It extends and broadens Trump's 2017 tax
cuts. It increases spending on border
security, makes deep cuts to Medicaid,
slashes food benefits for the poor, all
of which we will cover on the show if
this becomes law. But we wanted to talk
to you about its impact on the US
national debt, an extremely
controversial feature of this bill,
because you have been reporting on an
effort by congressional Republicans to
try to get this legislation over the
finish line by making $3 trillion worth
of debt basically disappear.
Yes. So, this really goes back to what
Republicans in both the House and the
Senate have wanted to do with the bill
this year. And their main goal has been
to extend a series of tax cuts that
Republicans first passed in 2017. Many
of them are expiring this year. And they
want to make those tax cuts permanent.
And so, Senate Republicans in their
bill, they use for the first time ever
what amounts to basically a fiscal magic
math to try and make the tax cut work.
Fiscal magic math. just explain that.
So, Republicans had a problem in their
quest to make the 2017 Trump tax cuts
permanent. And that problem was that the
process they're using to pass
legislation this year called
reconciliation has not historically
allowed lawmakers to do something like
that and comply with reconciliation's
rules. What about reconciliation, which
as we know now is the filibuster proof
process of passing legislation with a
simple majority? What about
reconciliation would make it impossible
to extend tax cuts permanently? So
reconciliation was originally designed
as a policy tool that was aimed at
reducing deficits over time and making
the fiscal situation of the country
better. And so one of the rules that
lawmakers agreed to for using this
process is that when you pass a bill
through reconciliation, you can't
increase the debt for more than 10
years. So in the first 10 years after
the bill passes, you know, maybe the
budget takes a hit, but 11 years later,
the fiscal picture has to start to
improve or not change compared to what
people were expecting before the bill.
And this rule around adding to the debt
in the long term has been a really
important rule in Congress for a long
time where when lawmakers in both
parties have used reconciliation to try
and achieve their more partisan goals
like Republicans are now, they have
obeyed this rule and they've scheduled
things to expire before what's called
the budget window or the 10-year maximum
that you're allowed to go under this
process. And obviously permanent tax
cuts exceed a 10-year window. So like
you said, Republicans clearly have a
problem here. Yes, they clearly have a
problem here. And you know, there are
other ways they could have gotten around
this. One would have been to try and pay
for these tax cuts in perpetuity, but
that would be extremely expensive and
difficult. They've already had a lot of
trouble cutting a much more modest
amount of spending in this bill. And so
what they came up with instead is an
accounting gimmick that basically makes
it seem like making these tax cuts
permanent does not add to the debt over
time. Okay. So walk us through this
budget gimmick. So essentially what
Senate Republicans are arguing is that
because these tax cuts exist now,
they've been, you know, the law of the
land since 2017, that continuing what's
in the budget now is not a new cost
essentially. That, you know, we're
they're preserving the status quo. The
United States has had these tax cuts for
years and so why should we consider it a
new tax cut to continue them and why
should we say that that costs you know
what is estimated to be $3.8 trillion
over 10 years to simply preserve the
status quo. And so what they're saying
is that because these tax cuts exist now
it's not a new hit to the budget to
continue them.
It's akin to saying, "Oh, I went on
vacation for a week and I was spending I
was really kind of having a great time
spending an extra $1,000 a day on drinks
and hotels and jet skis and all sorts of
fun stuff. And then when I come back
from vacation saying, "Well, I've been
spending an extra $1,000 a day for a
week and so why don't I just keep
spending an extra $1,000 a day? this
isn't really a change in my fiscal
situation, my financial situation,
because I've been doing this. Even
though when you planned the vacation, it
was only supposed to be a week long and
then you come and then you were supposed
to go back to what had been your
previous spending habits essentially.
And so they're arguing that these tax
cuts that they made temporarily to begin
with, that they only plan for for a
certain period of time actually should
be something that everyone assumes and
that they assume and should be treated
as something that was always going to be
part of the country's fiscal future.
Got it? So basically in this metaphor,
Republicans want the United States to
stay on a tax cutting vacation forever
and not acknowledge that our costs have
now changed. Yes, that's exactly right.
And they do this despite the fact that
when you come back from vacation and
keep spending an extra $1,000 a day,
that does materially change your budget.
And so this accounting description, the
way that they think about it, the way
that they talk about it, makes it look
one way, but in fact, the United States
will have to borrow a lot more money to
cover the cost of this tax cut forever.
Is this kind of creative accounting,
this kind of gimmick actually allowed?
My sense is that the Senate has a whole
system that sits in judgment of such
things. Literally a parliamentarian,
right, who looks at these things and
says, "You can't do that. That's a
gimmick. Yeah. So, so usually that is
how this works where you know through
the special reconciliation process the
parliamentarian she is asked to give her
advice or her view on whether XYZ policy
XYZ measure can be passed through the
process. In this case Republicans didn't
do that because their entire bill
basically depended on this accounting
assumption. They never went to the
parliamentarian and explicitly asked her
can we do this? They didn't want to be
told no. They didn't want to risk it
basically. I mean, it's we don't know
what she would have said because she was
never explicitly asked. Democrats
certainly think that she would not have
smiled upon this accounting gimmick, but
they just never asked. And then instead,
what happened is they went directly to
the floor of the Senate and through some
kind of parliamentary maneuvering, John
Thun, the Senate majority leader and a
Republican said that we can do this.
We're allowed to use whatever accounting
standard we want. A Republican senator
who was presiding over the chamber at
that point said, "Sure, yes, you can."
The debate and eventual voting on the
big beautiful bill has begun.
Hallelujah. It's taken a while. And at
that point, Lindsey Graham, who's the
Senate budget chairman, started to
defend this idea. I'm setting the
numbers. The parliamentarian said,
"That's my job as budget chairman."
Basically, what he was doing was relying
on very obscure elements and provisions
in budget law to say, "I'm the budget
chairman, and so I get to decide what
things cost." So, we're not doing
anything sneaky. We actually voted to
give me the authority to do this. That
I'm in control entirely of how all of
these numbers are counted, and you guys
need to listen to me. Well, first of
all, our bill drives the deficit down,
not up. Graham is joined on the Senate
floor by other Republicans who think
that this accounting gimmick is
completely legitimate. One of them was
Mike Crapo, the chairman of the Senate
Finance Committee. And the bottom line
here is is very simple. I think every
American, at least 90% of them,
intuitively understand that the refusal
to let your taxes go up by $4 trillion
is not a deficit increase. and he laid
out in depth why he thinks that
extending these tax cuts is avoiding a
tax increase. It shouldn't be considered
an additional cost to the budget. Us
keeping your money in your pocket is not
making you responsible for increasing
the deficit. Democrats protested and
asked for a vote and then Republicans
eventually voted to say, "Yeah, we can
do this." And so there was never any
formal decision or ruling as they call
it by the parliamentarian to say like,
"Yes, this is kosher. No, this is not
kosher." with reconciliation's rules and
instead Republicans just went for it.
[Music]
So with this accounting gimmick now
baked into this bill officially,
what becomes the cost of this
legislation to the national debt? Yeah.
So, Republicans have asked Washington's
official scorekeepers, the nerds over at
the Congressional Budget Office and the
Joint Committee on Taxation to analyze
the legislation according to their
preferred accounting standard. And what
they found was or what the CBO found was
that their bill rather than adding more
than $3 trillion to the debt over a
decade. By the Republican standard, it
would reduce the debt by half a trillion
dollars over a decade. So, that's
obviously a huge difference. reduces the
debt. Reduces the debt. Again, I'm
making this gigantic assumption and
changing the accounting principles. It
goes from increasing the debt
dramatically to actually shrinking it,
which is obviously a huge change. Hm. So
given the reality that this gimmick
doesn't actually wipe out this debt, but
simply changes how we talk about it and
how it's accounted for, what do the
fiscal hawks inside the Republican party
who have this bill before them have to
say about this? So some of them have
been very opposed to this before. There
have been Republicans in the House who
have called this the ultimate budget
gimmick, who have really been very
critical of thinking about the cost of
the bill this way. And that will become
very important now as the legislation
heads back to the House where there are
a lot of Republicans who have least made
noise about the fact that they think it
is too costly. We'll see how that
actually pans out when they vote on the
House floor. But this is a big deal. it
not only is it a problem among
Republicans in the short term, but it
also kind of fundamentally changes how
Congress can shape fiscal policy without
having to overcome the filibuster. And
so, Democrats have already indicated
that they hope to maybe take advantage
of this because, you know, being able to
change fiscal policy for the long term
is a desirable outcome for members of
both parties. Mhm. So that's kind of the
future that fiscal hawks are really
worried about because this rule on
saying, you know, we can't add to the
deficit or add to the debt in the long
term has been a limiting factor on how
much money Congress spends. I mean,
obviously, Congress has still not done a
great job at managing the nation's
finances and the fiscal forecast is
pretty dire as it is, but this has been
some kind of break on how much lawmakers
do when it's not a bipartisan bill. And
that break is now gone. Yes, that's
exactly right.
And there's concern that inevitably when
either Democrats control Congress again
or even just Republicans and they're
trying to make their own fiscal math
work to accomplish whatever big policy
priority they have, they'll just resort
to this accounting gimmick and that
could just blow out the debt forever.
[Music]
Well, Andy, thank you very much. Thanks
for having me.
[Music]
After the break, my colleague Colobby
Smith on why this time the financial
world is so worried about what more debt
could mean for America's financial
future.
We'll be right back.
Colby, our colleague Andy Duran just
explained how Senate Republicans made it
possible for this bill to create so much
debt despite rules saying that you can't
do that by using this budgetary slight
of hand. And we now turn to you to
understand whether this level of debt
from this bill and the precedent it sets
for a lot more debt in the future is
something that we should be worried
about because if we're being honest, the
United States has been living with very
high levels of debt for a very long
time. So does this moment feel
different? And if it does, why does it
feel different? So there are a couple of
things about this moment that are
different. First of all, the reality is
that the sheer amount of debt that we're
talking about here is enormous. So, our
total debt is around 28 trillion or
roughly 100% of GDP. And that's before
we're adding another 3 trillion or so to
the deficit with this bill. And just to
be clear, because that's a really
interesting sentence you just used, our
debt is the equivalent of our entire
gross domestic product, what we put out.
Yeah. It's incredibly high. and it's
it's at a level that we haven't really
seen since uh World War II. So, it's an
enormous sum. And so, when when we think
about the scale of it, that's one point
of concern. Mhm. But I think the major
thing that's going on here is that
there's a worry that the environment in
which we're accumulating this much debt
is just riskier than it has been in the
past. Well, just explain this notion
that the environment is riskier because
in this country, we have a habit of just
borrowing more and more money. And I've
learned through the many conversations
we've had on this show with many of our
colleagues from the business desk that
we do this through a time- tested
system, right? Like we have lots of debt
and we ask people to buy US Treasury
bonds in order to finance it. And the
system works pretty well, which is why
so far, despite everyone saying that
debt is a problem, it doesn't ever quite
seem to be a problem.
Right? So, the system is as tried and
true as it gets. In buying a Treasury
bond, the government is promising to pay
you back over an allotted period of time
with interest. And investors have always
felt confident in the government's
ability to pay back its debts. And the
confidence in that system offered the
government a lot of benefits. And one of
those benefits is an ability to borrow
quite cheaply and continue to finance
spending at relatively low interest
rates. But now what we're starting to
see are some questions being raised
about the properties underpinning the
Treasury market and whether you know
investors can continue to feel confident
to uh lend to the United States. Well,
just explain that. What about those
underpinnings is now in doubt? The the
source of the strife is not necessarily
that the US is about to let's say
default on its debt. It's that its role
in the global financial system as this
kind of beacon of stability is starting
to be challenged. And I think that that
started to come up in a number of ways
in the last couple of months.
The clearest sign of this was in the
immediate aftermath of what President
Trump dubbed Liberation Day when he
announced massive tariffs on virtually
all of the country's trading partners.
So, we saw this big selloff in US
government debt. And I think what was so
notable and worrisome about that
phenomenon was the fact that typically
in times of turmoil, investors, they
move out of riskier assets and they
flood into lower risk uh safer havens
like treasury bonds. Exactly. Like
treasury bonds. But that's not what
happened. People didn't flock to US
government debt. They instead sold it.
And so that just really kind of
exacerbated concerns. they're already
starting to percolate that investors
were starting to kind of secondguess
whether or not it made sense to increase
their exposure to the US. I think one of
the most telling examples of this was
when uh we heard from Japan's finance
minister um in early May, so right
around some of this turmoil that the
country was considering selling its
holdings of US treasuries. Now Japan is
the largest foreign holders of US debt.
So even like the vag hint that it would
even consider doing this I think sent
shock waves across the financial system.
Now of course this wasn't a threat that
they like followed through on but the
fact that he talked about it as a card
that could potentially be put on the
table was really disconcerting.
The message was quite clearly the
world's confidence in US treasuries in
this tool importantly for our
conversation that finances our debt has
been shaken.
Right. Absolutely. And and I think we
saw this um across the board like it
wasn't just with Japan. I remember going
down to this big um international
conference of global financial leaders
down in Washington DC in late April and
on the sidelines of this like big global
event um investors, economists, policy
makers, everyone was talking about
whether or not we should be thinking
about the US anymore as a safe haven.
Mhm. Now, we're not at that point yet,
but the concern is that once those
questions start being raised, you can
easily see a scenario where that doubt
starts feeding on itself and creating um
a situation in which um confidence in
the US really starts to waver. Well,
just explain that. What happens if
people around the world start to prefer
European bonds to American government
bonds and suddenly it becomes harder for
the US to convince people to finance our
debt? Just walk us through what that
starts to look like. So the fear here is
that over time it's just going to mean
that it's just much more expensive for
us to finance our debt load. You know,
in the past when we needed to borrow, we
could do it more cheaply. We saw this in
the aftermath of the pandemic when the
Trump administration and the Biden
administration um stepped in to shore up
the economy. Um we saw it in the
aftermath of the global financial crisis
as well. There were all kinds of
investors who were clamoring to hold our
debt. That meant demand was really
really strong and so the government
could finance those rescue packages
quite cheaply. Now the concern here is
that if the landscape gets much more
competitive and investors have multiple
places to put their their money, it
could well mean that demand for US
assets in particular reduces. And that
is going to require a larger payout to
entice investors to come back on shore.
And that's where the Republican bill,
you know, starts to really raise anxiety
levels here because we're already
spending a significant amount on debt
servicing costs. um we're doing so more
than we are spending on defense, on
Medicaid, on Medicare. And what this
bill is going to do is risk pushing
those costs ever higher. Um some of the
estimates that I hear is that one in
every four dollars now is going to go
towards paying down the debt. And that's
an enormous amount. Mhm. And so suddenly
if we need to pay people even more back
as a return for investing in our debt,
then that problem just compounds and
compounds and suddenly we're spending
even more money creating more debt just
to pay for our debt. Yeah, absolutely. I
mean like the way this is usually
described is like a doom loop that like
feeds on itself and and that's a
situation that can get a out of hand
quite quickly. So, we're by no means at
this point, right? But I think that if
you ask people their nightmare scenario,
that is uh what it looks like. Okay.
Well, what does a doom loop, if it were
to come to pass, mean for you, for me,
for the average American? So the the
more money that's being spent on
servicing the debt, the more we run the
risk of this problem of crowding out in
which the government is spending more on
servicing costs than they are on other
federal spending programs that help
everyday Americans. I think the other
major impact for the average American is
that it'll get more expensive for
themselves to borrow if it gets more
expensive for the government to borrow.
And so the way this works is that the
rate at which the government borrows
directly impacts the interest rates that
are used to set things like mortgages,
auto loans, things like that. So if
let's say the 10-year Treasury bond for
instance rises that can set off a
ricochet across the entire uh US
government debt market and that will
then mean that you know when you try to
buy a house and you try to borrow to buy
that house that mortgage is just going
to be that much more expensive. So these
are the various channels in which
Americans are directly affected by these
debt levels. So you're really talking
about a kind of double whammy in which
creating more debt for the US, which
this bill very clearly does, budgetary
slight of hand aside, means that the
government needs to spend more taxpayer
money to finance that debt, which is in
and of itself a very big deal. and
consumers as a result may end up needing
to spend more money to just live their
everyday lives in any way that it
interacts with borrowing. That's exactly
right. And I think adding to the worries
here is the fact that there's no acute
economic need to do this at the current
moment. So investors are used to seeing
surging deficits, let's say, when there
are wars or recessions or pandemics or
pandemics, right? That's a time when
when people want their government to
kind of spend to support the economy to
step in to save off a crisis. But what's
happening right now is that this big
increase in the debt is taking place
when things look relatively solid. And I
think that's why a lot of economists and
budget hawks are raising alarm bells
here because if you're not going to kind
of tighten your belts in good times,
what does that suggest about what
happens during bad times for instance?
Right. You're saying optional debt
creation, which is what we're doing
right now with this bill, may constrain
debt creation that's not optional
because we're in an emergency and we
need to borrow and it's going to be that
much harder. Exactly. The concern here
is that we're setting ourselves up for a
situation in which the government is
just less able to come to the rescue
when we need it most.
[Music]
And that's something that I think is
weighing on economists at this moment
when they look at this bill and they say
this is eating up any extra capacity
that we already didn't have at a time
when we don't need to.
So when the next crisis comes, when the
next slowdown happens, the government
could easily be just more hamstrung than
otherwise would have been the case.
[Music]
Well, Kobe, thank you very much. Thank
you.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need another day.
On Tuesday, the final results of the
Democratic primary for New York City
mayor showed that Zoron Mdani, the
33-year-old Democratic socialist, won
with 56% of the vote, defeating former
Governor Andrew Cuomo by 12 points.
In a likely sign of attacks to come,
President Trump suggested that Mandani
was a communist who was in the US
illegally. And in response to a question
from a reporter, suggested that he could
have Mandani imprisoned if he defies
federal immigration officials. Well,
then we'll have to arrest him. Look, we
don't need a communist in this country,
but if we have one, I'm going to be
watching over him very carefully on
behalf of the nation. We send him money.
Mani called Trump's remarks an attack on
democracy and declared, quote, "We will
not accept this intimidation."
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Rob
Zipco, Ricky Nevetski, and Moo Sadi. It
was edited by Mark George. Contains
original music by Pat McCusker, Diane
Wong, and Marian Lozano, and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Velansf of
Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Boro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]